INGREDIENTS

1 3/4 cups (210 g) spelt flour (whole wheat, unbleached all-purpose, or gluten free blend), see notes
1/3 cup (75 g) organic pure cane sugar (or 1/2 finely chopped dates)
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
pinch of mineral salt
1/3 cup (75 ml) neutral flavored oil (or coconut oil in liquid state, vegan butter at room temp or applesauce
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
4 small or 3 large overripe bananas (about 1 1/2 – 1 3/4 cups (338-410g)), mashed
1/4 cup (56 ml) almond milk, use only if needed
optional tasty add-ins:

1/2 – 2/3 cup chopped walnuts
1/4 – 1/2 cup chocolate chips (mini or regular)
1 teaspoon cinnamon
Cook Mode Prevent your screen from going dark
INSTRUCTIONS
Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Grease your loaf pan.


One bowl method: In a medium sized mixing bowl, mash 3 – 4 bananas (about 1 1/2 cups to 1 3/4 cups works well), add oil/applesauce and vanilla extract, mix again. Add the flour, sugar, baking soda, baking powder and salt, and mix well, but don’t overmix, just enough until the flour is combined. Batter will be slightly thick and a few lumps is ok. If mixture seems too thick, add milk, especially if using heavier flours such as whole wheat or whole spelt (you’re more inclined to need it).

Pour batter into a greased loaf pan. Bake for about 50 min – 1 hour. Ovens vary, mine usually takes 50 minutes. You can also do the toothpick test in the center of the loaf, if it comes out clean it should be ready. Remove from oven and let cool for 10 min before slicing.

Original method: In a medium/large size bowl, combine flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda and salt, set aside. In a medium bowl, mash bananas. Add the oil, vanilla and bananas to the dry ingredients and mix until combined, do not overmix. If mixture seems too thick, add the almond milk (especially if using heavier flours such as whole wheat or whole spelt, you’re more inclined to need it).

Pour batter into a greased loaf pan. Bake for about 50 min – 1 hour. Ovens vary, mine usually takes 50 minutes. You can also do the toothpick test in the center of the loaf, if it comes out clean it should be ready. Remove from oven and let cool for 10 min before slicing.

Store: Keep covered on the counter for up to 3 days or in the refrigerator up to 1 week. Keep in the freezer for up to 2 months. Thaw the wrapped loaves overnight in the refrigerator. Reheat in the microwave or a toaster oven with a door.

NOTES

When using metric units, scaling needs manual calculation.

Flour measurements. When using weighted amounts, flours vary by type. Use this guide to find the correct flour weight: Bob’s Red Mill Flour Weight Chart

No baking soda, no worries. If you don’t have baking soda on hand, use two teaspoons of baking powder. I’ve many loaves without baking soda with good results (the top just may not brown as much).

Oil-free or reduced oil. I have made this by replacing the oil with unsweetened applesauce and it was just as good. Loaf was a little denser and didn’t rise as much, but the flavor was still great. I’ve also played around with using half oil and half unsweetened almond milk (equalling 1/3 cup) with excellent results!

If using coconut oil, be sure it’s warmed and in its liquid state. My preferred oils for this recipe are either light-flavored olive oil or coconut oil.

Boost of flavor. Add up to 1 teaspoon of cinnamon to the dry ingredients for a different flavor.

Add nuts or seeds. Try adding toppings like walnuts, sesame seeds, rolled oats, sunflower seeds, or pecans.

Using dates: To use chopped dates using the 1 bowl method, simply add them in with all the ingredients. If using the original method, add them in with the wet ingredients. I would use about 1/3 – 3/4 cup of dates (depending on how sweet you like it), pitted and finely chopped.